Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project, interdueur Steve Fletcher, interviewee Alice
Chapman-Viersma. The date today is Sunday the 25th January 2015. The venue for the interview
is the Swicker office. Alice, for the record, would you be kind enough to spell your name
in full please? Absolutely, now married Alice Wearsma-Jones. A-L-I-C-E-W-I-E-R-S-M-A-
hyphen J-O-N-E-S. That's very kind of you. Sorry for getting you. It's fine. Sorry if we're not
married. We recently married. No absolutely. I've known you for a long time. It's magic. So how did
you first come across the Cardiff Carnival? Okay, wow, my first experience with Carnival.
I think that it can be put into three categories. First as a consumer, second as a participator,
and then third as a facilitator. So, consumer, very young child, on the shoulders of my father,
perhaps in Butetown, perhaps in the town centre, probably in Butetown actually considering how
long it was ago. I can remember big jangly glittery sparkly things coming past me and lots of
jemming and lots of exciting sunny happy shiny memories. Second as a participator, I think I'm
gonna have to start with my memories of Jab Jab. So being perhaps 14, 15 years old and coming down
to the Chapter Art Centre, obviously leading up to this sort of lots of making and sequins sticking
and glittering and all of that sort of stuff. But then I remember a very sunny afternoon,
sort of packing up all of the costumes, helping to pack up all the costumes and then coming back down
a really, really sunny evening, being instructed to wear as little as possible.
So coming in a pair of hot pants and a bikini top and covering ourselves from head to foot in mud,
so mud on our legs, mud on our arms, mud on our bellies, mud stripes on our faces,
and being given two sticks and banging them together and marching through the town centre
saying you know me well Jab Jab I come from hell Jab Jab you know me well Jab Jab I come from hell
obviously with all the Jemmas and what have you. And yeah being only sort of I must have been about
14, 15, perhaps 16 and then ending up in the Welsh Club and just having the best night of my life,
ridiculously underage. But they're not going to be able to tell and I'm covering myself in mud
and obviously with lots of different people and yeah just having a great time and meeting
Melissa, Carnival Jem dancer, Melissa for the first time. She was seeing a school friend of
mine Sam at the time and yeah just having a great time dancing with her and enjoying life, loving
life, really loving the Carnival. And then must have been the next day or the day after that
doing the Carnival Parade with my friend Zoe Hewitt who's also a Carnival artist.
So yeah really fond memories of that sort of first getting involved experience in the Carnival.
And then a bit later on in life obviously through the teenage years having such a great time myself
wanting to pass that experience on to children that I work with as a teacher, educator. I wasn't
actually a qualified teacher at the time I was a learning support assistant working in a school in
Trowbridge and I got a little carnival group together in school and we did lots of face painting
and we made our own costumes, we tie-dyed some clothes that the kids brought in actually,
I just asked them to bring in some white clothes and we tie-dyed them into tiger colours
and for the parade itself we painted our bodies in tiger paints and we danced in front of Rocco
and his in steel pans and I think that for me was the the most rewarding carnival experience I've
had for the first time bringing a bunch of kids down. Obviously Trowbridge at the time was a very
very white area, not so much now because we've got lots of refugee communities that have moved
into the area with the whole the government's dispersion ideas and what have you but at the
time it would have been our kids' only sort of exposure to Caribbean culture and they absolutely
loved it coming down and getting involved in mass and then the actual parade itself,
it was just really really wonderful for them and obviously my experiences growing up of carnival
loving it myself but then being able to work with young people and get them involved in a project
that they would otherwise not have the possibility to access, just really really rewarding,
really rewarding and just great for them as well to have that experience. The area that I'm teaching
is socially deprived and economically deprived but also culturally deprived,
not like you know your classic schools down the bay or in Grangetown or whatever. Obviously there's
lots of culture and colour and life and things happening in those areas, there's lots going on
all the time but in Trowbridge it's right on the edge of the city. When the shops burnt down it
took them three years to rebuild them so you're looking at the poorest people in Cardiff having
to catch a bus to go and buy a packet of cigarettes so you know there's nowhere for
them to go shopping let alone for them to go and dance and sing and sort of experience a
cultural event as it were so being able to provide that experience for those children
has just been fantastic. That's brilliant, you yourself personally have played a number of
different costumes when you're not entirely covered in mud. Any of them spring to mind for
reasons good bad or good bad or ugly? I think straight away the first thing that comes to mind
is that tiger costume that I was talking about earlier having got these kids who have very little
to go and buy their own white clothes for them we witch tie dyed and then painting them from head to
foot in tiger coloured paint and then that year actually pissed down with rain. Is that a technical
term? I sort of promised them holiday clothes that they could wear and they were really quite
excited to have these new little skirts and whatnot that were tie dyed so they were looking
forward to taking them camping and what have you and then of course it rained and I think if I just
stuck to the yellow and orange it would have been fine but I put black tiger stripes over the top
of the yellow and orange dapples and their face paint ran all over their costumes and they were
completely ruined. The kids seemed absolutely fine about it. Isn't it weird what's your attitude
with rain and carnival because it doesn't we've worked so hard and such a feeling of wanting to
you know the gun is loaded and come the day you really want to go down that road and do your thing.
Yeah it hasn't that wasn't the only rainy year I can remember the the second year I took a bunch
of kids I deliberately designed umbrellas with that group. I'd been to the pound shop in town
and I bought seven or eight or twelve or however many kids I had that year matching umbrellas and
we'd spent the week decorating them with sequins and putting sort of jewels around the edges and
sparkles hanging bits even and it was they were really really pretty but I think after about a
mile or less than that even we dumped them and we were just dancing in the rain having a great time
so I really you know I think that obviously the sun shining it's beautiful I think maybe the people
watching the carnival have a better time but in terms of us lot getting involved in dancing away
I don't think the weather really matters at all. Well your enthusiasm and passion for carnival has
been some self-evidence and as you say you've gone through these three different stages but
besides the carnival I mean you've even raised money and attracted swicker to do a carnival project
at your school taking us back to the source as it were so I'd just say a few words about
carnival Europa because it was a great experience. Yeah well I think that the there's two projects
really sticking my mind there and the first one being the lantern parade that you guys did for us
which was initially supposed to be a summer carnival but of course the funding didn't come
through in time so then hoping to save that money for the following summer and then realising that
the money had to be spent in this within a certain time frame as well so we ended up doing after your
your advice and ideas we did a winter lantern parade and that was magical for me having never
experienced or got involved in any of your lantern parades in the past. It was children
using willow and paper to make these sort of fantastic structures which we then were able
to light up. Fabulous for the kids I think lots of the parents assumed that we were making those
Chinese lanterns that you let off up into the sky so when I told them that we'd be sort of carrying
these lanterns on sticks and they get to actually take them home at the end of the day they were
just they were absolutely loving it and for months we had these incredible structures sort
of hanging all over the school which were just beautiful that sort of rainbow colours and white
and yeah that was really magical so you know my first experience of making something much more
three-dimensional than a headdress or a costume that was really fantastic and seeing you know
a carnival in the middle of winter as well I think we called it light up the streets with
Trowbridge or something and that was really great seeing the people out on the streets
seeing the kids dancing and having that sort of carnival fever feeling in the middle of January
that was really fab. Carnival Europa I think that was more towards the summer it's been so many I
can't remember now but yeah again going back to the the real real fact that there is no cultural
experiences in that part of Cardiff there was nothing for kids to get involved in
just seeing that area come alive with colour and costumes and music and people out in the park
watching us dance and the children's involvement just absolutely magical really really special
experience for the kids and for the staff involved. And for team Swicker they came
plus I remember the French Cockerel was a big thing a French Cockerel I mean they they come back
every day and sort of talk about that and yeah it was like yeah we had European students absolutely
yeah they were great really nice bunch of bunch of students um yeah we all were European worked
really well with the kids and it was quite nice to have you know yes they sort of worked on their
sections of the parade one of the fab things as well um you guys gave all the teachers a costume
and they sort of naturally as teachers do formed their own group in the carnival parade so we had
the French section the Spanish section and then the teachers section
somewhere near the back it was fab and then we all were and obviously I was running around but the
rest of them were all there and they were dragon wings and giant headdresses and whatnot just
looking absolutely fantastic that was one of the things that Adrian carnival organiser really liked
yeah he was like I love the way your teachers formed a section and there was a teacher's section
going on the back with a head teacher and everything and a beautiful headdress
yeah it's absolutely fab and at this point I'd like to award you the completely valueless but
invaluable accolade of a Cardiff carnival hero for your longevity for the three different ways in
which you have contributed and enjoyed Cardiff carnival but I think the one that becomes most
important uh I'd like to just underline is as a facilitator a gatekeeper who
who has no doubts is the value of carnival and constantly has you know gone an above and above
and beyond the call of any kind of duty to make sure that other people and young people in
particular can have an opportunity so Alice you are hereby officially dubbed Cardiff carnival hero
thank you very much that's really kind